.\" hey, Emacs:   -*- nroff -*-
.\" tlve is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\" 
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to
.\" the Free Software Foundation, 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\" 
.\" Please update the above date whenever this man page is modified.
.\" 
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins (default)
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.TH "TLVE" "1" "2013" "Timo Savinen" ""
.SH "NAME"
tlve
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B tlve
.RI [ options ]... 
.RI [ file ]...
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
\fBtlve\fP parses different tag\-length\-value structures and prints them in various text\-based formats.
.SH "OPTIONS"
\fBtlve\fP accepts the following options:
.TP 
.B \-c, " \-\-configuration \fIname\fR"
Read configuration from \fIname\fR instead of ~/.tlverc.
.TP 
.B \-d, \-\-debug
Dump unprocessable data to tlve.debug.
.TP 
.B \-n, " \-\-name\-list \fIlist\fR"
Print only elements having name or tag in comma separated list \fIlist\fR.
.TP 
.B \-s, " \-\-structure \fIname\fR"
Use structure \fIname\fR to process the input data.
.TP 
.B \-e, " \-\-expression \fIname\fR=\fIvalue\fR"
Print only elements for which the expression \fIname\fR=\fIvalue\fR evaluates true.
.TP 
.B \-a, \-\-and
All expressions must evaluate true.
.TP 
.B \-p, " \-\-print \fIname\fR"
Use printing definition \fIname\fR to print the data.
.TP 
.B \-o, " \-\-output \fIname\fR"
Write output to \fIname\fR instead of standard output.
.TP 
.B \-l, " \-\-start\-level \fIlevel\fR"
Print only levels starting from \fIlevel\fR in element hierarchy, first level is 1.
.TP 
.B \-L, " \-\-stop\-level \fIlevel\fR"
Print only levels to \fIlevel\fR in element hierarchy, first level is 1.
.TP 
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show summary of options.
.TP 
.B \-V, \-\-version
Show version of program.
.\"
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.LP 
The full documentation for tlve is maintained as a Texinfo manual. If the \fBinfo\fR and \fBtlve\fR are properly installed, the command
.sp 3
       \fBinfo\fR \fBtlve\fR
.sp 3
should give more information. 
.LP 
The manual is also available in HTML format in the \fBtlve\fR package.
.SH "AUTHOR"
Timo Savinen <tjsa@iki.fi>.
